Add first draft of gradcheck note (#55966)
pytorch/pytorch: docs/source/notes/gradcheck.rst

.. _gradcheck-mechanics:

Gradcheck mechanics
===================

This note presents an overview of how the :meth:`~torch.autograd.gradcheck` and :meth:`~torch.autograd.gradgradcheck` functions work.

> It will cover both forward and backward mode AD as well as complex valued functions and higher order derivatives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will cover both forward and backward mode AD for both real and complex valued functions as well as and higher order derivatives.
```

.. contents:: :local:
    :depth: 2

Notations and background informations
-------------------------------------

> Throughout this note, we will use :math:`x`, :math:`y`, :math:`a`, :math:`b`, :math:`v`, :math:`u`, :math:`ur` and :math:`ui` as real valued vectors and :math:`z` is a complex valued vector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Throughout this note, we will use :math:`x`, :math:`y`, :math:`a`, :math:`b`, :math:`v`, :math:`u`, :math:`ur` and :math:`ui` to represent real valued vectors and :math:`z` to represent a complex valued vector.
```

Reviewer: I don't this comment is addressed. could you consolidate all the conventions and present it in a list? I think it would make it easier for the readers of this note to read/come back and check the conventions, if needed, at any point.

We will use :math:`f: \mathcal{R}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M` as our basic real to real function such that :math:`y = f(x)`.
We will use :math:`g: \mathcal{C}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M` as our basic complex to real function such that :math:`y = g(z)`.
We will also use :math:`z = a + i b`.

For the simple real to real case, we write as :math:`J_f` the jacobian matrix associated with :math:`f` of size :math:`M \times N`.
This matrix contains all the partial derivatives such that the entry at position :math:`(i, j)` contains :math:`\frac{\partial y_i}{\partial x_j}`.
Backward mode AD is then computing, for a given vector :math:`v` of size :math:`M`, the quantity :math:`v^T J_f`.
Forward mode AD on the other hand is computing, for a given vector :math:`u` of size :math:`N`, the quantity :math:`J_f u`.

For functions that contain complex values, the story is a lot more complex. We only provide the gist here and the full description can be found at :ref:`complex_autograd-doc`.

Proper complex derivatives are too restrictive for most functions we care about. So we turn to Wirtinger calculus.

> In a basic setting of Wirtinger calculus, the chain rule required access to both the Wirtinger derivative (called :math:`W` below) and the Conjugate Wirtinger derivative (called :math:`CW` below). This means that in the general case of Wirtinger calculus, the values that we would need to "backward through the graph" in backward mode AD would need to be twice the size of the "forward value".

Reviewer: yeah I agree with @soulitzer

> In a basic setting of Wirtinger calculus, the chain rule required access to both the Wirtinger derivative (called :math:`W` below) and the Conjugate Wirtinger derivative (called :math:`CW` below). This means that in the general case of Wirtinger calculus, the values that we would need to "backward through the graph" in backward mode AD would need to be twice the size of the "forward value".

Reviewer: you could consider writing:
```
The constraints too satisfy complex differentiability (Cauchy-Riemann equations) are too restrictive for majority of non-trivial loss functions, so we instead opted to use Wirtinger calculus.  In a basic setting of Wirtinger calculus, the chain rule required access to both the Wirtinger derivative (called :math:`W` below) and the Conjugate Wirtinger derivative (called :math:`CW` below). However, we strictly assume that the function whose derivative is being calculated is either a real-valued function or is a part of a bigger real-valued function. Under that assumption, we can get around passing only the Conjugate Wirtinger derivative which equals to the conjugate of Writinger derivative in this case.
```

> To avoid this problem, for backward mode AD, we always work under the assumption that the current function is part of a bigger function whose output is in :math:`\mathcal{R}`. Note that this assumption means that all the intermediary gradients we compute during the backward pass are also corresponding to functions whose output is in :math:`\mathcal{R}`.

Reviewer 2: Maybe also add: "we can assume the overall function is R-valued because thats all we need for the purposes of optimization."

Under this assumption, we can show that :math:`W = CW^*` (we use :math:`*` to denote complex conjugation here) and so only one of the two values actually need to be "backwarded through the graph" as the other one can easily be recovered.
To simplify internal computations, PyTorch uses :math:`2 * CW` as the value it backwards and returns when the user asks for gradients.
Similarly to the real case, when the output is actually in :math:`\mathcal{R}^M`, the whole matrix cannot be recovered in one backward pass but only :math:`v^T (2 * CW)` for a given vector :math:`v \in \mathcal{R}^M`.

For forward mode AD, we use a similar logic, in this case, assuming that the function is part of a larger function whose input is in :math:`\mathcal{R}`. Under this assumption, we can make similar claim that every intermediary result corresponds to a function whose input is in :math:`\mathcal{R}` and in this case, we can show that :math:`W = CW` for the intermediary functions.
To make sure the forward and backward mode compute the same quantities, the forward mode also computes :math:`2 * CW`.

> Similarly to the real case, when the input is actually in :math:`\mathcal{R}^N`, the whole matrix cannot be recovered in one backward pass but only :math:`(2 * CW) u` for a given vector :math:`u \in \mathcal{R}^N`.

Author: Yes, that was moved around and does not make as much sense here.
Rephrasing this to reflect the real case above mentioning that backward mode AD only computes `(2 * CW) u` and not the full matrix.

Functions in :math:`\mathcal{C}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We want to test a function :math:`g: \mathcal{C}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M, z \to y` with :math:`z = a + i b`.
In this case, we reconstruct the (complex valued) matrix that contains :math:`2 * CW`.

Slow complex input numerical evaluation
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

When considering the simple case where :math:`N = M = 1`, we know (from first page of chapter 3 of `this research paper <https://arxiv.org/pdf/1701.00392.pdf>`_) that:

.. math::
    CW := \frac{\partial y}{\partial z^*} = \frac{1}{2} * (\frac{\partial y}{\partial a} + i \frac{\partial y}{\partial b})

It is important to note that in this formula, :math:`\frac{\partial y}{\partial a}` and :math:`\frac{\partial y}{\partial b}` are simple :math:`\mathcal{R} \to \mathcal{R}` derivatives.
To evaluate this numerically, we thus approximate :math:`\frac{\partial y}{\partial a}` and :math:`\frac{\partial y}{\partial b}` using the method described above for the real to real case, compute the :math:`CW` matrix and then multiply it by :math:`2`.

> Note that the current code computes this value in a slightly convoluted way:

Author: Yes, updated to "as of time of writing". We can remove that once the code is updated :D

.. math::
    \begin{aligned}
        s &= 2 * v^T (real(CW) ur + i * imag(CW) ui)
          &= v^T real(2 * CW) ur + i * v^T imag(2 * CW) ui)
          &= real(v^T (2 * CW)) ur + i * imag(v^T (2 * CW)) ui
    \end{aligned}

We can thus use the fact that the backward mode AD provides us with an efficient way to compute :math:`v^T (2 * CW)` and then perform a dot product of the real part with :math:`ur` and the imaginary part with :math:`ui` before reconstructing the final complex scalar :math:`s`.

Why not use a complex :math:`u`
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

At this point, you might be wondering why we did not select a complex :math:`u` and just performed the reduction :math:`2 * v^T CW u'`.
The problem is that when doing the numerical evaluation, considering :math:`u' = ur' + i ui'`, we would need to compute:

.. math::
    \begin{aligned}
        2*CW u' &= (dy/da + i dy/db)(ur' + i ui')
                &= dy/da ur' + i dy/da ui' + i dy/db ur' - dy/db ui'
    \end{aligned}

Which would require four evaluations of real to real finite difference (twice as much compared to the approached proposed above).

> Since this approach does not provide any correctness benefit, we use the formulation above.

Reviewer 2: Should we elaborate here on why it doesn't provide any correctness benefit?

.. _gradcheck-mechanics:

Gradcheck mechanics
===================

This note presents an overview of how the :meth:`~torch.autograd.gradcheck` and :meth:`~torch.autograd.gradgradcheck` functions work.

It will cover both forward and backward mode AD for both real and complex-valued functions as well as higher-order derivatives.

.. contents:: :local:
    :depth: 2

> Notations and background informations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notations and baackground information
```

To avoid this problem, for backward mode AD, we always work under the assumption that the current function is part of a bigger function whose output is in :math:`\mathcal{R}`. Note that this assumption means that all the intermediary gradients we compute during the backward pass are also corresponding to functions whose output is in :math:`\mathcal{R}`.
In practice, this assumption is not restrictive when doing optimization as such problem require a real-valued objective (as there is no natural ordering of the complex numbers).

Under this assumption, we can show that :math:`W = CW^*` (we use :math:`*` to denote complex conjugation here) and so only one of the two values actually need to be "backwarded through the graph" as the other one can easily be recovered.
To simplify internal computations, PyTorch uses :math:`2 * CW` as the value it backwards and returns when the user asks for gradients.

> Similarly to the real case, when the output is actually in :math:`\mathcal{R}^M`, backward mode AD does not compute :math:`2 * CW` but only :math:`v^T (2 * CW)` for a given vector :math:`v \in \mathcal{R}^M`.

Reviewer: Is the purpose of this to explain that we return the vector jacobian product? Regardless, all of this is explained in the note, so you could just get around writing:
`As explained in the complex autograd note <link it>, the value returned by backward mode AD is :math:`v^T * (2 * CW)` where v is a vector that belongs to the range of the function.`

Author: Yes the note is already linked just above. So here I just give the formula so that I can re-use it below.

> For forward mode AD, we use a similar logic, in this case, assuming that the function is part of a larger function whose input is in :math:`\mathcal{R}`. Under this assumption, we can make similar claim that every intermediary result corresponds to a function whose input is in :math:`\mathcal{R}` and in this case, we can show that :math:`W = CW` for the intermediary functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For forward mode AD, we use a similar logic, in this case, assuming that the function is part of a larger function whose input is in :math:`\mathcal{R}`.
```

Author: Why do you want to remove the second part of this?

Reviewer: hmm I guess we can keep it but change `we can show that :math:`W = CW` for the intermediary functions.` -> ` :math:`W = CW` for real-to-complex functions by Wirtinger and Conjugate Wirtinger derivative formula definitions.`

It might also make sense to include this and :math:`W = CW*` for real-to-complex functions in the notations and background information section.

> To make sure the forward and backward mode compute the same quantities, the forward mode also computes :math:`2 * CW`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Why do you want to remove this?

Reviewer: why would the forward and backward mode compute the same value? aren't they computing different values: JVP and VJP respectively?

Author: TODO: add an explicit comment here that we expect this for 1D -> 1D functions in particular

> Similarly to the real case, when the input is actually in :math:`\mathcal{R}^N`, forward mode AD does not compute :math:`2 * CW` but only :math:`(2 * CW) u` for a given vector :math:`u \in \mathcal{R}^N`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: The above text didn't address what happens when the input is not in :math:`\mathcal{R}^N`. The answer is we assume it's a part of a real-valued function. But anyway, I think it's a repeat of things you have already stated and explained, and so can be skipped.

Author: It is very similar to the paragraph above but I think there are key differences in the fact that now the product is on the right and the space where `u` lives is not the same.

Also because we re-use these products below, I prefer to have them stated here so that people can very easily know where they come from.

Reviewer: ahh okay

Current backward mode gradcheck behavior
----------------------------------------

Functions in :math:`\mathcal{R}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> We want to test a function :math:`f: \mathcal{R}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M, x \to y`.
> To do so, we reconstruct the full Jacobian matrix :math:`J_f` of size :math:`M \times N` in two ways.
> The analytical version uses our backward mode AD while the numerical version uses finite difference.
> We then compare each element of the two reconstructed Jacobian matrices to ensure they do match.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To test a function :math:`f: \mathcal{R}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M, x \to y`, we reconstruct the full Jacobian matrix :math:`J_f` of size :math:`M \times N` in two ways: analytical and numerical. The analytical version uses our backward mode AD while the numerical version uses finite difference. The two reconstructed Jacobian matrices are then compared elementwise for equality.
```

Slow real input numerical evaluation
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> If we consider the most basic case of a one-dimensional function (:math:`N = M = 1`), then we can use the basic finite difference formula from `the wikipedia article <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite_difference>`_ (we use the central difference for better numerical properties):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we consider the most basic case of a one-dimensional function (:math:`N = M = 1`), then we can use the basic finite difference formula from `the wikipedia article <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite_difference>`_ (we use the `central difference` for better numerical properties):
```

.. math::
    \frac{\partial y}{\partial x} \approx \frac{f(x + eps) - f(x - eps)}{2 * eps}

> This formula easily generalize for multiple outputs (:math:`M \gt 1`) by having :math:`\frac{\partial y}{\partial x}` be a column vector of size :math:`M \times 1` like :math:`f(x + eps)`. In that case, the above formula can be re-used as-is and approximate the full Jacobian matrix with only two evaluations of the user function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This formula can be easily generalized for multiple outputs (:math:`M \gt 1`) by having :math:`\frac{\partial y}{\partial x}` to be a column vector of size :math:`M \times 1` like :math:`f(x + eps)`. In that case, the above formula can be re-used as-is and the full Jacobian matrix can be approximated with only two evaluations of the user function.
```

Author: Added a comment for the function.
I did not change the tenses though to remain consistent with the rest of the note that does not (should not?) be using passive tenses.

> It is more expensive when considering the case with multiple inputs (:math:`N \gt 1`). To handle this case, we actually loop over all the inputs one after the other and apply the :math:`eps` perturbation for each element of :math:`x` one after the other. This allows us to reconstruct the :math:`J_f` matrix column by column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is more computationally expensive to handle the case with multiple inputs (:math:`N \gt 1`). In this scenario, we actually loop over all the inputs one after the other and apply the :math:`eps` perturbation for each element of :math:`x` one after the other. This allows us to reconstruct the :math:`J_f` matrix column by column.
```

Slow real input analytical evaluation
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> In this case, we use the fact, as described above that backward mode AD allows us to compute :math:`v^T J_f`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As described above, PyTorch's backward mode AD computes :math:`v^T J_f`.
```

> For functions that have a single output, we simply use :math:`v = 1` to recover the full Jacobian matrix with a single backward pass.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For functions with a single output, we simply use :math:`v = 1` to recover the full Jacobian matrix with a single backward pass.
```

> In the general case of multiple output, we again resort to a for-loop but this one iterates over the outputs where each :math:`v` is a one-hot vector corresponding to each output one after the other. This allows to reconstruct the :math:`J_f` matrix row by row.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For functions with more than one output, we resort to a for-loop which iterates over the outputs where each :math:`v` is a one-hot vector corresponding to each output one after the other. This allows to reconstruct the :math:`J_f` matrix row by row.
```

Functions in :math:`\mathcal{C}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> We want to test a function :math:`g: \mathcal{C}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M, z \to y` with :math:`z = a + i b`.
> In this case, we reconstruct the (complex-valued) matrix that contains :math:`2 * CW`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To test a function :math:`g: \mathcal{C}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M, z \to y`, where :math:`z = a + i b`, we reconstruct the (complex-valued) matrix that contains :math:`2 * CW`.
```

Slow complex input numerical evaluation
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> When considering the simple case where :math:`N = M = 1`, we know (from first page of chapter 3 of `this research paper <https://arxiv.org/pdf/1701.00392.pdf>`_) that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider the elementary case where :math:`N = M = 1`. We know from (chapter 3 of) `this research paper <https://arxiv.org/pdf/1701.00392.pdf>`_) that:
```

.. math::
    CW := \frac{\partial y}{\partial z^*} = \frac{1}{2} * (\frac{\partial y}{\partial a} + i \frac{\partial y}{\partial b})

> It is important to note that in this formula, :math:`\frac{\partial y}{\partial a}` and :math:`\frac{\partial y}{\partial b}` are simple :math:`\mathcal{R} \to \mathcal{R}` derivatives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that :math:`\frac{\partial y}{\partial a}` and :math:`\frac{\partial y}{\partial b}`, in the above equation, are :math:`\mathcal{R} \to \mathcal{R}` derivatives.
```

To evaluate this numerically, we thus approximate :math:`\frac{\partial y}{\partial a}` and :math:`\frac{\partial y}{\partial b}` using the method described above for the real-to-real case, compute the :math:`CW` matrix and then multiply it by :math:`2`.

Note that the code, as of time of writing, computes this value in a slightly convoluted way:

.. code:: python

    # Code from https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/blob/58eb23378f2a376565a66ac32c93a316c45b6131/torch/autograd/gradcheck.py#L99-L105
    # Notation changes in this code block:
    # s here is y above
    # x, y here are a, b above

    ds_dx = compute_gradient(eps)
    ds_dy = compute_gradient(eps * 1j)
    # conjugate wirtinger derivative
    conj_w_d = 0.5 * (ds_dx + ds_dy * 1j)
    # wirtinger derivative
    w_d = 0.5 * (ds_dx - ds_dy * 1j)
    d[d_idx] = grad_out.conjugate() * conj_w_d + grad_out * w_d.conj()

>     # Since grad_out is always 1, and W and CW are complex conjugate of each other, the last line ends up computing exactly `conj_w_d + w_d.conj() = conj_w_d + conj_w_d = 2 * conj_w_d`.

Reviewer: Will this be removed once we update the gradcheck code?

Author: Yes. We have a todo entry for that with Jeffrey

Slow complex input analytical evaluation
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> For this case, since the backward mode AD is computing exactly twice the :math:`CW` derivative already, we simply use the same trick as for the real-to-real case and reconstruct the matrix row by row when there are multiple real outputs.

Reviewer: I think this needs to be prefaced by stating that we gradcheck a complex valued function by gradchecking two `C->R` functions (out wrt real, out wrt imag).

> For this case, since the backward mode AD is computing exactly twice the :math:`CW` derivative already, we simply use the same trick as for the real-to-real case and reconstruct the matrix row by row when there are multiple real outputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since backward mode AD computes :math:`2 * CW` derivative already, we simply use the same trick as for the real-to-real case here and reconstruct the matrix row by row when there are multiple real outputs.
```

Functions with outputs in :math:`\mathcal{C}^M`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> In this case, the assumption we have about the computation of the :math:`CW` does not hold (output is not real) and so we cannot compute it directly to compare it.

Reviewer: which assumption?

Author: "output is not real" 
Should that be made clearer?

Reviewer: I don't think you made that assumption in the previous section. It was true by definition, since those were the functions you were dealing with in the last section. It might just be simple to say that "When the output is complex-valued, the formula no longer simplifies to `2 *CW` as in the previous case. However, for the ease of computation, we could look at two separate real valued functions (input, real(output)), (input, imag(output)) and gradcheck it as described in the previous section."

Author: TODO: mention that gradcheck here is a "user of the autograd" and so the function it gives to autograd should verify the autograd assumption to make sure the returned value by the autograd is well defined.

To solve this, we will replace the test of the function :math:`h: \mathcal{P}^N \to \mathcal{C}^M` (where :math:`\mathcal{P}` can be either :math:`\mathcal{R}` or :math:`\mathcal{C}`), with two functions :math:`hr` and :math:`hi` such that: :math:`hr(q) = real(f(q))` and :math:`hi(q) = imag(f(q))` where :math:`q \in \mathcal{P}`.

> We then do a basic gradcheck for both :math:`hr` and :math:`hi` using either the real-to-real or complex to real case described above, depending on :math:`\mathcal{P}`.

Reviewer: I think this can be re-written without using mathematical notations since we don't use them any way. 

`When the output is complex-valued, the gradient formula no longer simplifies to :math:`2 * CW`. However it could be verified, gradchecking :math:`(z, f(z))` is equivalent to gradchecking two real valued functions ( (z, real(f(z))), (z, imag(f(z)) ).

Author: I am not we can claim that the two are "equivalent" :D 
I am not sure the current way to write it uses more notation that what you propose? You define two new functions as well.

Reviewer: yeah true. I meant the current gradcheck for complex is equivalent to this new way of breaking down a complex-valued function into two real valued functions.

Note that in the code, as of time of writing, does not create these functions explicitly but perform the chain rule with the :math:`real` or :math:`imag` functions manually by passing the :math:`\text{grad\_out}` arguments to the different functions.
When :math:`\text{grad\_out} = 1`, then we are considering :math:`hr`.

> When :math:`\text{grad\_out} = i`, then we are considering :math:`hi`.

Reviewer: same question as above, will this be removed later?

Also please use, `:math:`\text{grad\_out} = 1j` to be consistent with the notation used in other docs.

Author: Yes it will.
I completely forgot the 1j / i difference, let me update the whole thing!

Fast backward mode gradcheck
----------------------------

> While the above formulation of gradcheck is great both to ensure correctness and debuggability, it is very slow the reconstruct full Jacobian matrices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the above formulation of gradcheck is great, both, to ensure correctness and debuggability, it is very slow since it reconstructs the full Jacobian matrices.
```

> This section presents a way to perform gradcheck in a faster way without affecting its correctness.

Reviewer: continue in the last paragraph

Author: Checked on the rendered version that they get collapsed in the rendered version. I keep them on different lines here for ease of read.

> The debuggability can be recovered easily by adding special code when we detect an error in the computed gradients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ease of debuggability is recovered by adding special code logic which runs the slow gradcheck we detect an error in the computed gradients.
```

> The high level strategy here is going to find a scalar quantity that can be computed efficiently by both the numerical and analytical methods and that represent well enough the full matrix computed by the slow code to ensure that it will catch any discrepancy in the Jacobians.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The high level strategy here is to find a scalar quantity that can be computed efficiently by both the numerical and analytical methods and represents full matrix computed by the slow gradcheck well enough to ensure that it will catch any discrepancy in the Jacobians.
```

Fast gradcheck for functions in :math:`\mathcal{R}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> In this case, the scalar quantity that we want to compute is :math:`v^T J_f u` for a given random vector :math:`v \in \mathcal{R}^M` and a random unit norm vector :math:`u \in \mathcal{R}^N`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The scalar quantity computed here is :math:`v^T J_f u` for a given random vector :math:`v \in \mathcal{R}^M` and a random unit norm vector :math:`u \in \mathcal{R}^N`.
```

To simplify internal computations, PyTorch uses :math:`2 * CW` as the value it backwards and returns when the user asks for gradients.
Similarly to the real case, when the output is actually in :math:`\mathcal{R}^M`, backward mode AD does not compute :math:`2 * CW` but only :math:`v^T (2 * CW)` for a given vector :math:`v \in \mathcal{R}^M`.

For forward mode AD, we use a similar logic, in this case, assuming that the function is part of a larger function whose input is in :math:`\mathcal{R}`. Under this assumption, we can make similar claim that every intermediary result corresponds to a function whose input is in :math:`\mathcal{R}` and in this case, we can show that :math:`W = CW` for the intermediary functions.
To make sure the forward and backward mode compute the same quantities, the forward mode also computes :math:`2 * CW`.
Similarly to the real case, when the input is actually in :math:`\mathcal{R}^N`, forward mode AD does not compute :math:`2 * CW` but only :math:`(2 * CW) u` for a given vector :math:`u \in \mathcal{R}^N`.

> Current backward mode gradcheck behavior

Reviewer 3: "Current" will be outdated when the fast gradcheck gets enabled by default for things, should we call it "full backward mode gradcheck behavior"?

Author: This will remain the default behavior. The fast version will only be enabled if you pass the kwarg.

But indeed I will add a comment in the intro about what all of these are!

----------------------------------------

Functions in :math:`\mathcal{R}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To test a function :math:`f: \mathcal{R}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M, x \to y`, we reconstruct the full Jacobian matrix :math:`J_f` of size :math:`M \times N` in two ways: analytical and numerical.
The analytical version uses our backward mode AD while the numerical version uses finite difference.
The two reconstructed Jacobian matrices are then compared elementwise for equality.

> Slow real input numerical evaluation

Reviewer 3: We haven't defined what "slow gradcheck" is yet. For folks who aren't familiar with gradcheck, it's not obvious why this is "slow". We could define "slow gradcheck" or we write "full jacobian numeric evaluation" or something

If we consider the elementary case of a one-dimensional function (:math:`N = M = 1`), then we can use the basic finite difference formula from `the wikipedia article <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite_difference>`_. We use the "central difference" for better numerical properties:

.. math::
    \frac{\partial y}{\partial x} \approx \frac{f(x + eps) - f(x - eps)}{2 * eps}

This formula easily generalizes for multiple outputs (:math:`M \gt 1`) by having :math:`\frac{\partial y}{\partial x}` be a column vector of size :math:`M \times 1` like :math:`f(x + eps)`.
In that case, the above formula can be re-used as-is and approximates the full Jacobian matrix with only two evaluations of the user function (namely :math:`f(x + eps)` and :math:`f(x - eps)`).

It is more computationally expensive to handle the case with multiple inputs (:math:`N \gt 1`). In this scenario, we loop over all the inputs one after the other and apply the :math:`eps` perturbation for each element of :math:`x` one after the other. This allows us to reconstruct the :math:`J_f` matrix column by column.

Slow real input analytical evaluation
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> For the analytical evaluate, we use the fact, as described above, that backward mode AD computes :math:`v^T J_f`.

Reviewer 3: nit: analytical evaluate -> analytical evaluation

Functions in :math:`\mathcal{C}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To test a function :math:`g: \mathcal{C}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M, z \to y` with :math:`z = a + i b`, we reconstruct the (complex-valued) matrix that contains :math:`2 * CW`.

Slow complex input numerical evaluation
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Consider the elementary case where :math:`N = M = 1` first. We know from (chapter 3 of) `this research paper <https://arxiv.org/pdf/1701.00392.pdf>`_) that:

.. math::
    CW := \frac{\partial y}{\partial z^*} = \frac{1}{2} * (\frac{\partial y}{\partial a} + i \frac{\partial y}{\partial b})

Note that :math:`\frac{\partial y}{\partial a}` and :math:`\frac{\partial y}{\partial b}`, in the above equation, are :math:`\mathcal{R} \to \mathcal{R}` derivatives.
To evaluate these numerically, we use the method described above for the real-to-real case.
This allows us to compute the :math:`CW` matrix and then multiply it by :math:`2`.

> Note that the code, as of time of writing, computes this value in a slightly convoluted way:

Reviewer 3: Out of curiosity, why do we compute it in a convoluted way?

Author: Mostly because the mathematical formulation that was derived a few months back when writing this was very different from the one here. And it lead to different formulas.

The two actually check the same thing in the end.

Slow complex input analytical evaluation
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Since backward mode AD computes exactly twice the :math:`CW` derivative already, we simply use the same trick as for the real-to-real case here and reconstruct the matrix row by row when there are multiple real outputs.

Functions with outputs in :math:`\mathcal{C}^M`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In this case, the assumption we have about the computation of the :math:`CW` does not hold (output is not real) and so we cannot compute it directly to compare it.
To solve this, we will replace the test of the function :math:`h: \mathcal{P}^N \to \mathcal{C}^M` (where :math:`\mathcal{P}` can be either :math:`\mathcal{R}` or :math:`\mathcal{C}`), with two functions :math:`hr` and :math:`hi` such that: :math:`hr(q) = real(f(q))` and :math:`hi(q) = imag(f(q))` where :math:`q \in \mathcal{P}`.
We then do a basic gradcheck for both :math:`hr` and :math:`hi` using either the real-to-real or complex-to-real case described above, depending on :math:`\mathcal{P}`.

> Note that, the code, as of time of writing, does not create these functions explicitly but perform the chain rule with the :math:`real` or :math:`imag` functions manually by passing the :math:`\text{grad\_out}` arguments to the different functions.

Reviewer 3: nit: would it be good to provide a commit hash? If someone wants to take a look at the code at the time of writing?

Author: Yes. I hope to be able to remove this in a couple of weeks, so I didn't think too much about it :D

When :math:`\text{grad\_out} = 1`, then we are considering :math:`hr`.
When :math:`\text{grad\_out} = 1j`, then we are considering :math:`hi`.

Fast backward mode gradcheck
----------------------------

While the above formulation of gradcheck is great, both, to ensure correctness and debuggability, it is very slow because it reconstructs the full Jacobian matrices.
This section presents a way to perform gradcheck in a faster way without affecting its correctness.

> The debuggability can be recovered by adding special code logic when we detect an error. In that case, we can run the slow code that reconstruct the full matrix to give full details to the user.

Reviewer 3: nit: that reconstruct -> that reconstructs

Due to some constraints on what we can compute efficiently in the numerical case and to keep the number of numerical evaluations to a minimum, we compute the following (albeit surprising) scalar value:

.. math::
    s := 2 * v^T (real(CW) ur + i * imag(CW) ui)

where :math:`v \in \mathcal{R}^M`, :math:`ur \in \mathcal{R}^N` and :math:`ui \in \mathcal{R}^N`.

Fast complex input numerical evaluation
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

We first consider how to compute :math:`s` with a numerical method. To do so, keeping in mind that we're considering :math:`g: \mathcal{C}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M, z \to y` with :math:`z = a + i b`, and that :math:`CW = \frac{1}{2} * (\frac{\partial y}{\partial a} + i \frac{\partial y}{\partial b})`,  we rewrite it as follows:

.. math::
    \begin{aligned}
        s &= 2 * v^T (real(CW) ur + i * imag(CW) ui)
          &= 2 * v^T (\frac{1}{2} * \frac{\partial y}{\partial a} ur + i * \frac{1}{2} * \frac{\partial y}{\partial b} ui)
          &= v^T (\frac{\partial y}{\partial a} ur + i * \frac{\partial y}{\partial b} ui)
          &= v^T ((\frac{\partial y}{\partial a} ur) + i * (\frac{\partial y}{\partial b} ui))
    \end{aligned}

> 

Reviewer 3: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5652049/115565611-83c5e000-a287-11eb-8963-2ab8ee3694db.png)

nit: This gets cut off (you can scroll to the right to recover it, though). It might look nicer if everything were on different lines?

Author: This is definitely missing the end of lines! Good catch!

.. _gradcheck-mechanics:

Gradcheck mechanics
===================

This note presents an overview of how the :meth:`~torch.autograd.gradcheck` and :meth:`~torch.autograd.gradgradcheck` functions work.

It will cover both forward and backward mode AD for both real and complex-valued functions as well as higher-order derivatives.
This note also covers both the default behavior of gradcheck as well as the case where :code:`fast_mode=True` argument is passed (referred to as fast gradcheck below).

.. contents:: :local:
    :depth: 2

Notations and background information
------------------------------------

Throughout this note, we will use the following convention:

> 1. :math:`x`, :math:`y`, :math:`a`, :math:`b`, :math:`v`, :math:`u`, :math:`ur` and :math:`ui` as real-valued vectors and :math:`z` is a complex-valued vector that can be rewritten in terms of two real-valued vectors as :math:`z = a + i b`.

Reviewer 2: I think you might need spaces between the 1, 2, etc. or else the formatting gets messed up

Similarly to the real case, when the output is actually in :math:`\mathcal{R}^M`, backward mode AD does not compute :math:`2 * CW` but only :math:`v^T (2 * CW)` for a given vector :math:`v \in \mathcal{R}^M`.

For forward mode AD, we use a similar logic, in this case, assuming that the function is part of a larger function whose input is in :math:`\mathcal{R}`. Under this assumption, we can make a similar claim that every intermediary result corresponds to a function whose input is in :math:`\mathcal{R}` and in this case, using :math:`W` and :math:`CW` definitions, we can show that :math:`W = CW` for the intermediary functions.
To make sure the forward and backward mode compute the same quantities in the elementary case of a one dimensional function, the forward mode also computes :math:`2 * CW`.
Similarly to the real case, when the input is actually in :math:`\mathcal{R}^N`, forward mode AD does not compute :math:`2 * CW` but only :math:`(2 * CW) u` for a given vector :math:`u \in \mathcal{R}^N`.

Default backward mode gradcheck behavior
----------------------------------------

> Functions in :math:`\mathcal{R}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M`

Reviewer 2: Pure stylistic thing: I don't know if you feel strongly about this, but instead of writing R^N -> R^M for example, you could say real-to-real function. It would make the TOC and the headings look a lot cleaner IMO. 

Ditto for the other headings

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> To test a function :math:`f: \mathcal{R}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M, x \to y`, we reconstruct the full Jacobian matrix :math:`J_f` of size :math:`M \times N` in two ways: analytical and numerical.

Reviewer 2: analytical and numerical -> analytically and numerically

We then do a basic gradcheck for both :math:`hr` and :math:`hi` using either the real-to-real or complex-to-real case described above, depending on :math:`\mathcal{P}`.

Note that, the code, as of time of writing, does not create these functions explicitly but perform the chain rule with the :math:`real` or :math:`imag` functions manually by passing the :math:`\text{grad\_out}` arguments to the different functions.
When :math:`\text{grad\_out} = 1`, then we are considering :math:`hr`.
When :math:`\text{grad\_out} = 1j`, then we are considering :math:`hi`.

Fast backward mode gradcheck
----------------------------

While the above formulation of gradcheck is great, both, to ensure correctness and debuggability, it is very slow because it reconstructs the full Jacobian matrices.
This section presents a way to perform gradcheck in a faster way without affecting its correctness.

> The debuggability can be recovered by adding special code logic when we detect an error. In that case, we can run the slow code that reconstructs the full matrix to give full details to the user.

Reviewer 2: special code logic -> special logic
slow code -> slow version?

The high level strategy here is to find a scalar quantity that can be computed efficiently by both the numerical and analytical methods and that represents the full matrix computed by the slow gradcheck well enough to ensure that it will catch any discrepancy in the Jacobians.

Fast gradcheck for functions in :math:`\mathcal{R}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The scalar quantity that we want to compute here is :math:`v^T J_f u` for a given random vector :math:`v \in \mathcal{R}^M` and a random unit norm vector :math:`u \in \mathcal{R}^N`.

For the numerical evaluation, we can efficiently compute :math:`J_f u \approx \frac{f(x + u * eps) - f(x - u * eps)}{2 * eps}`. We then perform the dot product between this vector and :math:`v` to get the scalar value of interest.

For the analytical version, we can use backward mode AD to compute :math:`v^T J_f` directly. We then perform the dot product with :math:`u` to get the expected value.

Fast gradcheck for functions in :math:`\mathcal{C}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> In a similar way to the real-to-real case, we want to perform a reduction of the full matrix. But the :math:`2 * CW` matrix is complex-valued and so in this case, we will compare to complex scalars.

Reviewer 2: Similar to the real-to-real case,

    \end{aligned}

In this formula, we can see that :math:`\frac{\partial y}{\partial a} ur` and :math:`\frac{\partial y}{\partial b} ui` can be evaluated the same way as the fast version for the real-to-real case.
Once these real-valued quantities have been computed, we can reconstruct the complex vector on the right side and do a dot product with the real-valued :math:`v` vector.

Fast complex input analytical evaluation
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

For the analytical case, things are simpler and we rewrite the formula as:

.. math::
    \begin{aligned}
        s &= 2 * v^T (real(CW) ur + i * imag(CW) ui) \\
          &= v^T real(2 * CW) ur + i * v^T imag(2 * CW) ui) \\
          &= real(v^T (2 * CW)) ur + i * imag(v^T (2 * CW)) ui
    \end{aligned}

We can thus use the fact that the backward mode AD provides us with an efficient way to compute :math:`v^T (2 * CW)` and then perform a dot product of the real part with :math:`ur` and the imaginary part with :math:`ui` before reconstructing the final complex scalar :math:`s`.

Why not use a complex :math:`u`
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> At this point, you might be wondering why we did not select a complex :math:`u` and just performed the reduction :math:`2 * v^T CW u'`.

Reviewer 2: Might want to explain why we have both u' and u or just simply just use u.

The problem is that when doing the numerical evaluation, considering :math:`u' = ur' + i ui'`, we would need to compute:

.. math::
    \begin{aligned}

>         2*CW u' &= (dy/da + i dy/db)(ur' + i ui') \\

Reviewer 2: dy/daur' is a little hard to read. Lets also use \frac here?

Author: Ho yes I forgot to update that formula from the initial draft, good catch!

                &= dy/da ur' + i dy/da ui' + i dy/db ur' - dy/db ui'
    \end{aligned}

Which would require four evaluations of real-to-real finite difference (twice as much compared to the approached proposed above).
Since this approach does not have more degrees of freedom (same number of real valued variables) and we try to get the fastest possible evaluation here, we use the other formulation above.

Fast gradcheck for functions with outputs in :math:`\mathcal{C}^M`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Just like in the slow case, we consider two real-valued function and use the appropriate rule from above for each function.

Reviewer 2: function -> functions

> Gradgrad check implementation

Reviewer 2: gradgrad check -> gradgradcheck?

Reviewer 2: I see you also have gradgrad check below, not sure if you meant to do so

Author: Yes moving to one word to be consistent with how we use "gradcheck"

Default real input analytical evaluation
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

For the analytical evaluation, we use the fact, as described above, that backward mode AD computes :math:`v^T J_f`.
For functions with a single output, we simply use :math:`v = 1` to recover the full Jacobian matrix with a single backward pass.

For functions with more than one output, we resort to a for-loop which iterates over the outputs where each :math:`v` is a one-hot vector corresponding to each output one after the other. This allows to reconstruct the :math:`J_f` matrix row by row.

Complex-to-real functions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To test a function :math:`g: \mathcal{C}^N \to \mathcal{R}^M, z \to y` with :math:`z = a + i b`, we reconstruct the (complex-valued) matrix that contains :math:`2 * CW`.

Default complex input numerical evaluation
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> Consider the elementary case where :math:`N = M = 1` first. We know from (chapter 3 of) `this research paper <https://arxiv.org/pdf/1701.00392.pdf>`_) that:

Reviewer 2: extra parens (chapter 3 of **)** this research paper ... )

    # Notation changes in this code block:
    # s here is y above
    # x, y here are a, b above

    ds_dx = compute_gradient(eps)
    ds_dy = compute_gradient(eps * 1j)
    # conjugate wirtinger derivative
    conj_w_d = 0.5 * (ds_dx + ds_dy * 1j)
    # wirtinger derivative
    w_d = 0.5 * (ds_dx - ds_dy * 1j)
    d[d_idx] = grad_out.conjugate() * conj_w_d + grad_out * w_d.conj()

    # Since grad_out is always 1, and W and CW are complex conjugate of each other, the last line ends up computing exactly `conj_w_d + w_d.conj() = conj_w_d + conj_w_d = 2 * conj_w_d`.

Default complex input analytical evaluation
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Since backward mode AD computes exactly twice the :math:`CW` derivative already, we simply use the same trick as for the real-to-real case here and reconstruct the matrix row by row when there are multiple real outputs.

Functions with complex outputs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In this case, the user-provided function does not follow the assumption from the autograd that the function we compute backward AD for is real-valued.
This means that using autograd directly on this function is not well defined.

> To solve this, we will replace the test of the function :math:`h: \mathcal{P}^N \to \mathcal{C}^M` (where :math:`\mathcal{P}` can be either :math:`\mathcal{R}` or :math:`\mathcal{C}`), with two functions :math:`hr` and :math:`hi` such that: :math:`hr(q) = real(f(q))` and :math:`hi(q) = imag(f(q))` where :math:`q \in \mathcal{P}`.

Reviewer 2: Having hi/hr definitions inline looks a bit funny. Maybe separate out the hr/hi equations into a separate block
```
To solve this, we will replace the test of the function :math:`h: \mathcal{P}^N \to \mathcal{C}^M` where math:`\mathcal{P}` can be either :math:`\mathcal{R}` or :math:`\mathcal{C}` with two functions hr and hi defined as

.. math::
    \begin{align*}
        hr(q) &:= real(f(q)) \\
        hi(q) &:= imag(f(q))
    \end{align*}

where :math:`q \in \mathcal{P}`.
..

When :math:`\text{grad\_out} = 1j`, then we are considering :math:`hi`.

Fast backward mode gradcheck
----------------------------

While the above formulation of gradcheck is great, both, to ensure correctness and debuggability, it is very slow because it reconstructs the full Jacobian matrices.
This section presents a way to perform gradcheck in a faster way without affecting its correctness.
The debuggability can be recovered by adding special logic when we detect an error. In that case, we can run the default version that reconstructs the full matrix to give full details to the user.

The high level strategy here is to find a scalar quantity that can be computed efficiently by both the numerical and analytical methods and that represents the full matrix computed by the slow gradcheck well enough to ensure that it will catch any discrepancy in the Jacobians.

Fast gradcheck for real-to-real functions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The scalar quantity that we want to compute here is :math:`v^T J_f u` for a given random vector :math:`v \in \mathcal{R}^M` and a random unit norm vector :math:`u \in \mathcal{R}^N`.

> For the numerical evaluation, we can efficiently compute :math:`J_f u \approx \frac{f(x + u * eps) - f(x - u * eps)}{2 * eps}`. We then perform the dot product between this vector and :math:`v` to get the scalar value of interest.

Reviewer 2: Might be slightly cleaner to factor this out into its own block as well:
```
For the numerical evaluation, we can efficiently compute

.. math::
    J_f u \approx \frac{f(x + u * eps) - f(x - u * eps)}{2 * eps}`

We can then perform the dot product...
```
